BUILDGUIDE.md, before:

# Guidelines for Building Microsoft.Data.SqlClient

This document provides all the necessary details to build the driver and run tests present in the repository.

## Visual Studio Pre-Requisites

This project should be built with Visual Studio 2019+ for the best compatibility. The required set of components are provided in the below file:

- **Visual Studio 2019** with imported components: [VS19Components](/tools/vsconfig/VS19Components.vsconfig)

- **Powershell**: To build SqlClient on Linux, powershell is needed as well. Follow the distro specific instructions at [Install Powershell on Linux](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/scripting/install/installing-powershell-on-linux?view=powershell-7.4)

Once the environment is setup properly, execute the desired set of commands below from the _root_ folder to perform the respective operations:

## MSBuild Reference

### Targets

|Target|Description|
|-|-|
|`BuildAllConfigurations`|Default target. Builds the .NET Framework and .NET drivers for all target frameworks and operating systems.|
|`BuildNetCore`|Builds the .NET driver for all target frameworks.|
|`BuildNetCoreAllOS`|Builds the .NET driver for all target frameworks and operating systems.|
|`BuildNetFx`|Builds the .NET Framework driver for all target frameworks.|
|`BuildTests`|Builds tests for the .NET and .NET Framework drivers.|
|`BuildTestsNetCore`|Builds tests for the .NET driver.|
|`BuildTestsNetFx`|Builds tests for the .NET Framework driver.|
|`Clean`|Cleans generated files.|
|`Restore`|Restores Nuget packages.|
|`RunTests`|Runs the functional and manual tests for the .NET Framework and .NET drivers|
|`RunFunctionalTests`|Runs just the functional tests for the .NET Framework and .NET drivers|
|`RunManualTests`|Runs just the manual tests for the .NET Framework and .NET drivers|


### Parameters
|Name|Supported Values|Default|Description|
|-|-|-|-|
|`Configuration`|`Debug`, `Release`|`Debug`|Sets the release configuration.|
|`BuildNetFx`|`true`, `false`|`true` (Windows), `false` (other)|If false, skips building the .NET Framework driver on Windows.|
|`OSGroup`|`Unix`, `Windows_NT`, `AnyOS`|typically defaults to the client system's OS, unless using `BuildAllConfigurations` or an `AnyOS` specific target|The operating system to target.|
|`Platform`|`AnyCPU`, `x86`, `x64`, `ARM`, `ARM64`|`AnyCPU`|May only be set when using package reference type or running tests.|
|`TestSet`|`1`, `2`, `3`, `AE`|all|Build or run a subset of the manual tests. Omit (default) to target all tests.|
|`DotnetPath`|Absolute file path to an installed `dotnet` version.|The system default specified by the path variable|Set to run tests using a specific dotnet version (e.g. C:\net6-win-x86\)|
|`TF`|`net8.0`, `net462`, `net47`, `net471`, `net472`, `net48`, `net481`|`net8.0` in netcore, `net462` in netfx|Sets the target framework when building or running tests. Not applicable when building the drivers.|
|`ResultsDirectory`|An absolute file path|./TestResults relative to current directory|Specifies where to write test results.|


## Example Workflows using MSBuild (Recommended)
Using the default configuration and running all tests:

```bash
msbuild
msbuild -t:BuildTests
msbuild -t:RunTests
```

Targeting .NET Framework (or any specific supported version):

```bash
msbuild -p:TF=net462
msbuild -t:BuildTests -p:TF=net462
msbuild -t:RunTests -p:TF=net462
```

Using the Release configuration:

```bash
msbuild -p:configuration=Release
msbuild -t:BuildTests -p:configuration=Release
msbuild -t:RunTests -p:configuration=Release
```

Running only the functional tests:

```bash
msbuild
msbuild -t:BuildTests
msbuild -t:RunFunctionalTests
```

Using a specific dotnet version/architecture:

```bash
msbuild -p:configuration=Release
msbuild -t:BuildTests -p:configuration=Release
msbuild -t:RunTests -p:configuration=Release -p:DotnetPath=C:\net8-win-x86\
```

### Running Manual Tests

#### Pre-Requisites for running Manual tests

Manual Tests require the below setup to run:

- SQL Server with enabled Shared Memory, TCP and Named Pipes Protocols and access to the Client OS.
- Databases "NORTHWIND" and "UdtTestDb" present in SQL Server, created using SQL scripts [createNorthwindDb.sql](tools/testsql/createNorthwindDb.sql) and [createUdtTestDb.sql](tools/testsql/createUdtTestDb.sql). To setup an Azure Database with "NORTHWIND" tables, use SQL Script: [createNorthwindAzureDb.sql](tools/testsql/createNorthwindAzureDb.sql).
- Make a copy of the configuration file [config.default.json](src/Microsoft.Data.SqlClient/tests/tools/Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.TestUtilities/config.default.json) and rename it to `config.json`. Update the values in `config.json`:

  |Property|Description|Value|
  |------|--------|-------------------|
  |TCPConnectionString | Connection String for a TCP enabled SQL Server instance. | `Server={servername};Database={Database_Name};Trusted_Connection=True;` <br/> OR `Data Source={servername};Initial Catalog={Database_Name};Integrated Security=True;`|
  |NPConnectionString | Connection String for a Named Pipes enabled SQL Server instance.| `Server=\\{servername}\pipe\sql\query;Database={Database_Name};Trusted_Connection=True;` <br/> OR <br/> `Data Source=np:{servername};Initial Catalog={Database_Name};Integrated Security=True;`|
  |TCPConnectionStringHGSVBS | (Optional) Connection String for a TCP enabled SQL Server with Host Guardian Service (HGS) attestation protocol configuration. | `Server=tcp:{servername}; Database={Database_Name}; UID={UID}; PWD={PWD}; Attestation Protocol = HGS; Enclave Attestation Url = {AttestationURL};`|
  |TCPConnectionStringNoneVBS | (Optional) Connection String for a TCP enabled SQL Server with a VBS Enclave and using None Attestation protocol configuration. | `Server=tcp:{servername}; Database={Database_Name}; UID={UID}; PWD={PWD}; Attestation Protocol = NONE;`|
  |TCPConnectionStringAASSGX | (Optional) Connection String for a TCP enabled SQL Server with a SGX Enclave and using Microsoft Azure Attestation (AAS) attestation protocol configuration. | `Server=tcp:{servername}; Database={Database_Name}; UID={UID}; PWD={PWD}; Attestation Protocol = AAS; Enclave Attestation Url = {AttestationURL};`|
  |EnclaveEnabled | Enables tests requiring an enclave-configured server.|
  |TracingEnabled | Enables EventSource related tests |
  |AADAuthorityURL | (Optional) Identifies the OAuth2 authority resource for `Server` specified in `AADPasswordConnectionString` | `https://login.windows.net/<tenant>`, where `<tenant>` is the tenant ID of the Azure Active Directory (Azure AD) tenant |
  |AADPasswordConnectionString | (Optional) Connection String for testing Azure Active Directory Password Authentication. | `Data Source={server.database.windows.net}; Initial Catalog={Azure_DB_Name};Authentication=Active Directory Password; User ID={AAD_User}; Password={AAD_User_Password};`|
  |AADSecurePrincipalId | (Optional) The Application Id of a registered application which has been granted permission to the database defined in the AADPasswordConnectionString. | {Application ID} |
  |AADSecurePrincipalSecret | (Optional) A Secret defined for a registered application which has been granted permission to the database defined in the AADPasswordConnectionString. | {Secret} |
  |AzureKeyVaultURL | (Optional) Azure Key Vault Identifier URL | `https://{keyvaultname}.vault.azure.net/` |
  |AzureKeyVaultTenantId | (Optional) The Azure Active Directory tenant (directory) Id of the service principal. | _{Tenant ID of Active Directory}_ |
  |SupportsIntegratedSecurity | (Optional) Whether or not the USER running tests has integrated security access to the target SQL Server.| `true` OR `false`|  
  |LocalDbAppName | (Optional) If Local Db Testing is supported, this property configures the name of Local DB App instance available in client environment. Empty string value disables Local Db testing. | Name of Local Db App to connect to.|
  |LocalDbSharedInstanceName | (Optional) If LocalDB testing is supported and the instance is shared, this property configures the name of the shared instance of LocalDB to connect to. | Name of shared instance of LocalDB. |
  |FileStreamDirectory | (Optional) If File Stream is enabled on SQL Server, pass local directory path to be used for setting up File Stream enabled database. |  `D:\\escaped\\absolute\\path\\to\\directory\\` |
  |UseManagedSNIOnWindows | (Optional) Enables testing with Managed SNI on Windows| `true` OR `false`|
  |DNSCachingConnString | Connection string for a server that supports DNS Caching|
  |EnclaveAzureDatabaseConnString | (Optional) Connection string for Azure database with enclaves |
  |ManagedIdentitySupported | (Optional) When set to `false` **Managed Identity** related tests won't run. The default value is `true`. |
  |IsManagedInstance | (Optional) When set to `true` **TVP** related tests will use on non-Azure bs files to compare test results. this is needed when testing against Managed Instances or TVP Tests will fail on Test set 3. The default value is `false`. |
  |PowerShellPath | The full path to PowerShell.exe. This is not required if the path is present in the PATH environment variable. | `D:\\escaped\\absolute\\path\\to\\PowerShell.exe` |


## Example workflows using the Dotnet SDK

#### Run Functional Tests

- Windows (`netfx x86`):

```bash
msbuild 
dotnet test "src\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient\tests\FunctionalTests\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Tests.csproj" -p:Platform="x86" -p:Configuration="Release" -p:TestTargetOS="Windowsnetfx" --no-build -v n --filter "category!=nonnetfxtests&category!=failing&category!=nonwindowstests"
```

- Windows (`netfx x64`):

```bash
dotnet test "src\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient\tests\FunctionalTests\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Tests.csproj" -p:Platform="x64" -p:Configuration="Release" -p:TestTargetOS="Windowsnetfx" --no-build -v n --filter "category!=nonnetfxtests&category!=failing&category!=nonwindowstests"
```

- AnyCPU:
  
  Project reference only builds Driver with `AnyCPU` platform, and underlying process decides to run the tests with a compatible architecture (x64, x86, ARM64).

  Windows (`netcoreapp`):
  
```bash
dotnet test "src\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient\tests\FunctionalTests\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Tests.csproj" -p:Platform="AnyCPU" -p:Configuration="Release" -p:TestTargetOS="Windowsnetcoreapp" --no-build -v n --filter "category!=nonnetcoreapptests&category!=failing&category!=nonwindowstests"
```

  Unix (`netcoreapp`):

```bash
dotnet test "src/Microsoft.Data.SqlClient/tests/FunctionalTests/Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Tests.csproj" -p:Platform="AnyCPU" -p:Configuration="Release" -p:TestTargetOS="Unixnetcoreapp" --no-build -v n --filter "category!=nonnetcoreapptests&category!=failing&category!=nonlinuxtests&category!=nonuaptests"
```
#### Run Manual Tests

- Windows (`netfx x86`):

```bash
dotnet test "src\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient\tests\ManualTests\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.ManualTesting.Tests.csproj" -p:Platform="x86" -p:Configuration="Release" -p:TestTargetOS="Windowsnetfx" --no-build -v n --filter "category!=nonnetfxtests&category!=failing&category!=nonwindowstests"
  ```

- Windows (`netfx x64`):

```bash
dotnet test "src\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient\tests\ManualTests\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.ManualTesting.Tests.csproj" -p:Platform="x64" -p:Configuration="Release" -p:TestTargetOS="Windowsnetfx" --no-build -v n --filter "category!=nonnetfxtests&category!=failing&category!=nonwindowstests"
```

- Windows (`netfx`):

```bash
dotnet test "src\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient\tests\ManualTests\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.ManualTesting.Tests.csproj" -p:Platform="AnyCPU" -p:Configuration="Release" -p:TestTargetOS="Windowsnetfx" --no-build -v n --filter "category!=nonnetfxtests&category!=failing&category!=nonwindowstests"
```

- Windows (`netcoreapp`):

```bash
dotnet test "src\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient\tests\ManualTests\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.ManualTesting.Tests.csproj" -p:Platform="AnyCPU" -p:Configuration="Release" -p:TestTargetOS="Windowsnetcoreapp" --no-build -v n --filter "category!=nonnetcoreapptests&category!=failing&category!=nonwindowstests"
```

- Unix (`netcoreapp`):

```bash
dotnet test "src/Microsoft.Data.SqlClient/tests/ManualTests/Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.ManualTesting.Tests.csproj" -p:Platform="AnyCPU" -p:Configuration="Release" -p:TestTargetOS="Unixnetcoreapp" --no-build -v n --filter "category!=nonnetcoreapptests&category!=failing&category!=nonlinuxtests&category!=nonuaptests"
```

## Run A Single Test

```bash
dotnet test "src\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient\tests\ManualTests\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.ManualTesting.Tests.csproj" -p:Platform="AnyCPU" -p:Configuration="Release" -p:TestTargetOS="Windowsnetcoreapp" --no-build -v n --filter "FullyQualifiedName=Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.ManualTesting.Tests.AlwaysEncrypted.CspProviderExt.TestKeysFromCertificatesCreatedWithMultipleCryptoProviders"
```

## Testing with Custom ReferenceType

Tests can be built and run with custom "Reference Type" property that enables different styles of testing:

- "Project" => Build and run tests with Microsoft.Data.SqlClient as Project Reference
- "Package" => Build and run tests with Microsoft.Data.SqlClient as Package Reference with configured "TestMicrosoftDataSqlClientVersion" in "Versions.props" file.

> ************** IMPORTANT NOTE BEFORE PROCEEDING WITH "PACKAGE" REFERENCE TYPE ***************
> CREATE A NUGET PACKAGE WITH BELOW COMMAND AND ADD TO LOCAL FOLDER + UPDATE NUGET CONFIG FILE TO READ FROM THAT LOCATION
>
> ```bash
>  msbuild -p:configuration=Release
> ```

A non-AnyCPU platform reference can only be used with package reference type. Otherwise, the specified platform will be replaced with AnyCPU in the build process.

### Building Tests with Reference Type

For .NET, all 4 reference types are supported:

```bash
msbuild -t:BuildTestsNetCore -p:ReferenceType=Project
# Default setting uses Project Reference.

msbuild -t:BuildTestsNetCore -p:ReferenceType=Package
```

For .NET Framework, below reference types are supported:

```bash
msbuild -t:BuildTestsNetFx -p:ReferenceType=Project
# Default setting uses Project Reference.

msbuild -t:BuildTestsNetFx -p:ReferenceType=Package
```

### Running Tests with Reference Type

Provide property to `dotnet test` commands for testing desired reference type.

```bash
dotnet test -p:ReferenceType=Project ...
```

## Testing with Custom TargetFramework (traditional)

Tests can be built and run with custom Target Frameworks. See the below examples.

### Building Tests with custom target framework

```bash
msbuild -t:BuildTestsNetFx -p:TargetNetFxVersion=net462
# Build the tests for custom .NET Framework target
```

```bash
msbuild -t:BuildTestsNetCore -p:TargetNetCoreVersion=net8.0
# Build the tests for custom .NET target
```

### Running Tests with custom target framework (traditional)

```bash
dotnet test -p:TargetNetFxVersion=net462 ...
# Use above property to run Functional Tests with custom .NET Framework target

dotnet test -p:TargetNetCoreVersion=net8.0 ...
# Use above property to run Functional Tests with custom .NET target
```


## Using Managed SNI on Windows

Managed SNI can be enabled on Windows by enabling the below AppContext switch:

`Switch.Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.UseManagedNetworkingOnWindows`

## Set truncation on for scaled decimal parameters

Scaled decimal parameter truncation can be enabled by enabling the below AppContext switch:

`Switch.Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.TruncateScaledDecimal`

## Enabling row version null behavior

`SqlDataReader` returns a `DBNull` value instead of an empty `byte[]`. To enable the legacy behavior, you must enable the following AppContext switch on application startup:

`Switch.Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.LegacyRowVersionNullBehavior`

## Suppressing TLS security warning

When connecting to a server, if a protocol lower than TLS 1.2 is negotiated, a security warning is output to the console. This warning can be suppressed on SQL connections with `Encrypt = false` by enabling the following AppContext switch on application startup:

`Switch.Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.SuppressInsecureTLSWarning`

## Debugging SqlClient on Linux from Windows

For enhanced developer experience, we support debugging SqlClient on Linux from Windows, using the project "**Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.DockerLinuxTest**" that requires "Container Tools" to be enabled in Visual Studio. You may import configuration: [VS19Components.vsconfig](./tools/vsconfig/VS19Components.vsconfig) if not enabled already.

This project is also included in `docker-compose.yml` to demonstrate connectivity with SQL Server docker image.

To run the same:

1. Build the Solution in Visual Studio
2. Set  `docker-compose` as Startup Project
3. Run "Docker-Compose" launch configuration.
4. You will see similar message in Debug window:

    ```log
    Connected to SQL Server v15.00.4023 from Unix 4.19.76.0
    The program 'dotnet' has exited with code 0 (0x0).
    ```

5. Now you can write code in [Program.cs](/src/Microsoft.Data.SqlClient/tests/DockerLinuxTest/Program.cs) to debug SqlClient on Linux!

### Troubleshooting Docker issues

There may be times where connection cannot be made to SQL Server, we found below ideas helpful:

- Clear Docker images to create clean image from time-to-time, and clear docker cache if needed by running `docker system prune` in Command Prompt.

- If you face `Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.SNI.dll not found` errors when debugging, try updating the below properties in the netcore\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.csproj file and try again:

  ```xml
    <OSGroup>Unix</OSGroup>
    <TargetsWindows>false</TargetsWindows>
    <TargetsUnix>true</TargetsUnix>
  ```

## Collecting Code Coverage

### Using VSTest

```bash
dotnet test <test_properties...> --collect:"Code Coverage"
```

### Using Coverlet Collector

```bash
dotnet test <test_properties...> --collect:"XPlat Code Coverage"
```

## Run Performance Tests

### Running Performance test project directly

Project location from Root: `src\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient\tests\PerformanceTests\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.PerformanceTests.csproj`
Configure `runnerconfig.json` file with connection string and preferred settings to run Benchmark Jobs.

```bash
cd src\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient\tests\PerformanceTests
dotnet run -c Release -f net8.0
```

_Only "**Release** Configuration" applies to Performance Tests_

Commit message:

Backport 6.0 | Use global.json in all pipeline jobs (#3927) (#3959)
* Backport 6.1 | Use global.json in all pipeline jobs  (#3927)

* Manual fixes after cherry-pick conflict resolution.

* Removed .NET 9 Runtime installaations since they are already included in .NET 9 SDKs.

* Addressed Copilot review comments.

BUILDGUIDE.md, after:

# Guidelines for Building Microsoft.Data.SqlClient

This document provides all the necessary details to build the driver and run tests present in the repository.

## .NET SDK

The projects in this repo require the .NET 9.0 SDK to build.  Please ensure you
have the latest version of that SDK installed.

Tests and tools may require different .NET Runtimes that may be installed
independently.  For example, tests targeting .NET 8.0 will need that runtime
installed.

## Visual Studio Pre-Requisites

This project should be built with Visual Studio 2019+ for the best compatibility. The required set of components are provided in the below file:

- **Visual Studio 2019** with imported components: [VS19Components](/tools/vsconfig/VS19Components.vsconfig)

- **Powershell**: To build SqlClient on Linux, powershell is needed as well. Follow the distro specific instructions at [Install Powershell on Linux](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/scripting/install/installing-powershell-on-linux?view=powershell-7.4)

Once the environment is setup properly, execute the desired set of commands below from the _root_ folder to perform the respective operations:

## MSBuild Reference

### Targets

|Target|Description|
|-|-|
|`BuildAllConfigurations`|Default target. Builds the .NET Framework and .NET drivers for all target frameworks and operating systems.|
|`BuildNetCore`|Builds the .NET driver for all target frameworks.|
|`BuildNetCoreAllOS`|Builds the .NET driver for all target frameworks and operating systems.|
|`BuildNetFx`|Builds the .NET Framework driver for all target frameworks.|
|`BuildTests`|Builds tests for the .NET and .NET Framework drivers.|
|`BuildTestsNetCore`|Builds tests for the .NET driver.|
|`BuildTestsNetFx`|Builds tests for the .NET Framework driver.|
|`Clean`|Cleans generated files.|
|`Restore`|Restores Nuget packages.|
|`RunTests`|Runs the functional and manual tests for the .NET Framework and .NET drivers|
|`RunFunctionalTests`|Runs just the functional tests for the .NET Framework and .NET drivers|
|`RunManualTests`|Runs just the manual tests for the .NET Framework and .NET drivers|


### Parameters
|Name|Supported Values|Default|Description|
|-|-|-|-|
|`Configuration`|`Debug`, `Release`|`Debug`|Sets the release configuration.|
|`BuildNetFx`|`true`, `false`|`true` (Windows), `false` (other)|If false, skips building the .NET Framework driver on Windows.|
|`OSGroup`|`Unix`, `Windows_NT`, `AnyOS`|typically defaults to the client system's OS, unless using `BuildAllConfigurations` or an `AnyOS` specific target|The operating system to target.|
|`Platform`|`AnyCPU`, `x86`, `x64`, `ARM`, `ARM64`|`AnyCPU`|May only be set when using package reference type or running tests.|
|`TestSet`|`1`, `2`, `3`, `AE`|all|Build or run a subset of the manual tests. Omit (default) to target all tests.|
|`DotnetPath`|Absolute file path to an installed `dotnet` version.|The system default specified by the path variable|Set to run tests using a specific dotnet version (e.g. C:\net6-win-x86\)|
|`TF`|`net8.0`, `net462`, `net47`, `net471`, `net472`, `net48`, `net481`|`net8.0` in netcore, `net462` in netfx|Sets the target framework when building or running tests. Not applicable when building the drivers.|
|`ResultsDirectory`|An absolute file path|./TestResults relative to current directory|Specifies where to write test results.|


## Example Workflows using MSBuild (Recommended)
Using the default configuration and running all tests:

```bash
msbuild
msbuild -t:BuildTests
msbuild -t:RunTests
```

Targeting .NET Framework (or any specific supported version):

```bash
msbuild -p:TF=net462
msbuild -t:BuildTests -p:TF=net462
msbuild -t:RunTests -p:TF=net462
```

Using the Release configuration:

```bash
msbuild -p:configuration=Release
msbuild -t:BuildTests -p:configuration=Release
msbuild -t:RunTests -p:configuration=Release
```

Running only the functional tests:

```bash
msbuild
msbuild -t:BuildTests
msbuild -t:RunFunctionalTests
```

Using a specific dotnet version/architecture:

```bash
msbuild -p:configuration=Release
msbuild -t:BuildTests -p:configuration=Release
msbuild -t:RunTests -p:configuration=Release -p:DotnetPath=C:\net8-win-x86\
```

### Running Manual Tests

#### Pre-Requisites for running Manual tests

Manual Tests require the below setup to run:

- SQL Server with enabled Shared Memory, TCP and Named Pipes Protocols and access to the Client OS.
- Databases "NORTHWIND" and "UdtTestDb" present in SQL Server, created using SQL scripts [createNorthwindDb.sql](tools/testsql/createNorthwindDb.sql) and [createUdtTestDb.sql](tools/testsql/createUdtTestDb.sql). To setup an Azure Database with "NORTHWIND" tables, use SQL Script: [createNorthwindAzureDb.sql](tools/testsql/createNorthwindAzureDb.sql).
- Make a copy of the configuration file [config.default.json](src/Microsoft.Data.SqlClient/tests/tools/Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.TestUtilities/config.default.json) and rename it to `config.json`. Update the values in `config.json`:

  |Property|Description|Value|
  |------|--------|-------------------|
  |TCPConnectionString | Connection String for a TCP enabled SQL Server instance. | `Server={servername};Database={Database_Name};Trusted_Connection=True;` <br/> OR `Data Source={servername};Initial Catalog={Database_Name};Integrated Security=True;`|
  |NPConnectionString | Connection String for a Named Pipes enabled SQL Server instance.| `Server=\\{servername}\pipe\sql\query;Database={Database_Name};Trusted_Connection=True;` <br/> OR <br/> `Data Source=np:{servername};Initial Catalog={Database_Name};Integrated Security=True;`|
  |TCPConnectionStringHGSVBS | (Optional) Connection String for a TCP enabled SQL Server with Host Guardian Service (HGS) attestation protocol configuration. | `Server=tcp:{servername}; Database={Database_Name}; UID={UID}; PWD={PWD}; Attestation Protocol = HGS; Enclave Attestation Url = {AttestationURL};`|
  |TCPConnectionStringNoneVBS | (Optional) Connection String for a TCP enabled SQL Server with a VBS Enclave and using None Attestation protocol configuration. | `Server=tcp:{servername}; Database={Database_Name}; UID={UID}; PWD={PWD}; Attestation Protocol = NONE;`|
  |TCPConnectionStringAASSGX | (Optional) Connection String for a TCP enabled SQL Server with a SGX Enclave and using Microsoft Azure Attestation (AAS) attestation protocol configuration. | `Server=tcp:{servername}; Database={Database_Name}; UID={UID}; PWD={PWD}; Attestation Protocol = AAS; Enclave Attestation Url = {AttestationURL};`|
  |EnclaveEnabled | Enables tests requiring an enclave-configured server.|
  |TracingEnabled | Enables EventSource related tests |
  |AADAuthorityURL | (Optional) Identifies the OAuth2 authority resource for `Server` specified in `AADPasswordConnectionString` | `https://login.windows.net/<tenant>`, where `<tenant>` is the tenant ID of the Azure Active Directory (Azure AD) tenant |
  |AADPasswordConnectionString | (Optional) Connection String for testing Azure Active Directory Password Authentication. | `Data Source={server.database.windows.net}; Initial Catalog={Azure_DB_Name};Authentication=Active Directory Password; User ID={AAD_User}; Password={AAD_User_Password};`|
  |AADSecurePrincipalId | (Optional) The Application Id of a registered application which has been granted permission to the database defined in the AADPasswordConnectionString. | {Application ID} |
  |AADSecurePrincipalSecret | (Optional) A Secret defined for a registered application which has been granted permission to the database defined in the AADPasswordConnectionString. | {Secret} |
  |AzureKeyVaultURL | (Optional) Azure Key Vault Identifier URL | `https://{keyvaultname}.vault.azure.net/` |
  |AzureKeyVaultTenantId | (Optional) The Azure Active Directory tenant (directory) Id of the service principal. | _{Tenant ID of Active Directory}_ |
  |SupportsIntegratedSecurity | (Optional) Whether or not the USER running tests has integrated security access to the target SQL Server.| `true` OR `false`|
  |LocalDbAppName | (Optional) If Local Db Testing is supported, this property configures the name of Local DB App instance available in client environment. Empty string value disables Local Db testing. | Name of Local Db App to connect to.|
  |LocalDbSharedInstanceName | (Optional) If LocalDB testing is supported and the instance is shared, this property configures the name of the shared instance of LocalDB to connect to. | Name of shared instance of LocalDB. |
  |FileStreamDirectory | (Optional) If File Stream is enabled on SQL Server, pass local directory path to be used for setting up File Stream enabled database. |  `D:\\escaped\\absolute\\path\\to\\directory\\` |
  |UseManagedSNIOnWindows | (Optional) Enables testing with Managed SNI on Windows| `true` OR `false`|
  |DNSCachingConnString | Connection string for a server that supports DNS Caching|
  |EnclaveAzureDatabaseConnString | (Optional) Connection string for Azure database with enclaves |
  |ManagedIdentitySupported | (Optional) When set to `false` **Managed Identity** related tests won't run. The default value is `true`. |
  |IsManagedInstance | (Optional) When set to `true` **TVP** related tests will use on non-Azure bs files to compare test results. this is needed when testing against Managed Instances or TVP Tests will fail on Test set 3. The default value is `false`. |
  |PowerShellPath | The full path to PowerShell.exe. This is not required if the path is present in the PATH environment variable. | `D:\\escaped\\absolute\\path\\to\\PowerShell.exe` |


## Example workflows using the Dotnet SDK

#### Run Functional Tests

- Windows (`netfx x86`):

```bash
msbuild
dotnet test "src\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient\tests\FunctionalTests\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Tests.csproj" -p:Platform="x86" -p:Configuration="Release" -p:TestTargetOS="Windowsnetfx" --no-build -v n --filter "category!=nonnetfxtests&category!=failing&category!=nonwindowstests"
```

- Windows (`netfx x64`):

```bash
dotnet test "src\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient\tests\FunctionalTests\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Tests.csproj" -p:Platform="x64" -p:Configuration="Release" -p:TestTargetOS="Windowsnetfx" --no-build -v n --filter "category!=nonnetfxtests&category!=failing&category!=nonwindowstests"
```

- AnyCPU:

  Project reference only builds Driver with `AnyCPU` platform, and underlying process decides to run the tests with a compatible architecture (x64, x86, ARM64).

  Windows (`netcoreapp`):

```bash
dotnet test "src\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient\tests\FunctionalTests\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Tests.csproj" -p:Platform="AnyCPU" -p:Configuration="Release" -p:TestTargetOS="Windowsnetcoreapp" --no-build -v n --filter "category!=nonnetcoreapptests&category!=failing&category!=nonwindowstests"
```

  Unix (`netcoreapp`):

```bash
dotnet test "src/Microsoft.Data.SqlClient/tests/FunctionalTests/Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Tests.csproj" -p:Platform="AnyCPU" -p:Configuration="Release" -p:TestTargetOS="Unixnetcoreapp" --no-build -v n --filter "category!=nonnetcoreapptests&category!=failing&category!=nonlinuxtests&category!=nonuaptests"
```
#### Run Manual Tests

- Windows (`netfx x86`):

```bash
dotnet test "src\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient\tests\ManualTests\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.ManualTesting.Tests.csproj" -p:Platform="x86" -p:Configuration="Release" -p:TestTargetOS="Windowsnetfx" --no-build -v n --filter "category!=nonnetfxtests&category!=failing&category!=nonwindowstests"
  ```

- Windows (`netfx x64`):

```bash
dotnet test "src\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient\tests\ManualTests\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.ManualTesting.Tests.csproj" -p:Platform="x64" -p:Configuration="Release" -p:TestTargetOS="Windowsnetfx" --no-build -v n --filter "category!=nonnetfxtests&category!=failing&category!=nonwindowstests"
```

- Windows (`netfx`):

```bash
dotnet test "src\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient\tests\ManualTests\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.ManualTesting.Tests.csproj" -p:Platform="AnyCPU" -p:Configuration="Release" -p:TestTargetOS="Windowsnetfx" --no-build -v n --filter "category!=nonnetfxtests&category!=failing&category!=nonwindowstests"
```

- Windows (`netcoreapp`):

```bash
dotnet test "src\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient\tests\ManualTests\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.ManualTesting.Tests.csproj" -p:Platform="AnyCPU" -p:Configuration="Release" -p:TestTargetOS="Windowsnetcoreapp" --no-build -v n --filter "category!=nonnetcoreapptests&category!=failing&category!=nonwindowstests"
```

- Unix (`netcoreapp`):

```bash
dotnet test "src/Microsoft.Data.SqlClient/tests/ManualTests/Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.ManualTesting.Tests.csproj" -p:Platform="AnyCPU" -p:Configuration="Release" -p:TestTargetOS="Unixnetcoreapp" --no-build -v n --filter "category!=nonnetcoreapptests&category!=failing&category!=nonlinuxtests&category!=nonuaptests"
```

## Run A Single Test

```bash
dotnet test "src\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient\tests\ManualTests\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.ManualTesting.Tests.csproj" -p:Platform="AnyCPU" -p:Configuration="Release" -p:TestTargetOS="Windowsnetcoreapp" --no-build -v n --filter "FullyQualifiedName=Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.ManualTesting.Tests.AlwaysEncrypted.CspProviderExt.TestKeysFromCertificatesCreatedWithMultipleCryptoProviders"
```

## Testing with Custom ReferenceType

Tests can be built and run with custom "Reference Type" property that enables different styles of testing:

- "Project" => Build and run tests with Microsoft.Data.SqlClient as Project Reference
- "Package" => Build and run tests with Microsoft.Data.SqlClient as Package Reference with configured "TestMicrosoftDataSqlClientVersion" in "Versions.props" file.

> ************** IMPORTANT NOTE BEFORE PROCEEDING WITH "PACKAGE" REFERENCE TYPE ***************
> CREATE A NUGET PACKAGE WITH BELOW COMMAND AND ADD TO LOCAL FOLDER + UPDATE NUGET CONFIG FILE TO READ FROM THAT LOCATION
>
> ```bash
>  msbuild -p:configuration=Release
> ```

A non-AnyCPU platform reference can only be used with package reference type. Otherwise, the specified platform will be replaced with AnyCPU in the build process.

### Building Tests with Reference Type

For .NET, all 4 reference types are supported:

```bash
msbuild -t:BuildTestsNetCore -p:ReferenceType=Project
# Default setting uses Project Reference.

msbuild -t:BuildTestsNetCore -p:ReferenceType=Package
```

For .NET Framework, below reference types are supported:

```bash
msbuild -t:BuildTestsNetFx -p:ReferenceType=Project
# Default setting uses Project Reference.

msbuild -t:BuildTestsNetFx -p:ReferenceType=Package
```

### Running Tests with Reference Type

Provide property to `dotnet test` commands for testing desired reference type.

```bash
dotnet test -p:ReferenceType=Project ...
```

## Testing with Custom TargetFramework (traditional)

Tests can be built and run with custom Target Frameworks. See the below examples.

### Building Tests with custom target framework

```bash
msbuild -t:BuildTestsNetFx -p:TargetNetFxVersion=net462
# Build the tests for custom .NET Framework target
```

```bash
msbuild -t:BuildTestsNetCore -p:TargetNetCoreVersion=net8.0
# Build the tests for custom .NET target
```

### Running Tests with custom target framework (traditional)

```bash
dotnet test -p:TargetNetFxVersion=net462 ...
# Use above property to run Functional Tests with custom .NET Framework target

dotnet test -p:TargetNetCoreVersion=net8.0 ...
# Use above property to run Functional Tests with custom .NET target
```


## Using Managed SNI on Windows

Managed SNI can be enabled on Windows by enabling the below AppContext switch:

`Switch.Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.UseManagedNetworkingOnWindows`

## Set truncation on for scaled decimal parameters

Scaled decimal parameter truncation can be enabled by enabling the below AppContext switch:

`Switch.Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.TruncateScaledDecimal`

## Enabling row version null behavior

`SqlDataReader` returns a `DBNull` value instead of an empty `byte[]`. To enable the legacy behavior, you must enable the following AppContext switch on application startup:

`Switch.Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.LegacyRowVersionNullBehavior`

## Suppressing TLS security warning

When connecting to a server, if a protocol lower than TLS 1.2 is negotiated, a security warning is output to the console. This warning can be suppressed on SQL connections with `Encrypt = false` by enabling the following AppContext switch on application startup:

`Switch.Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.SuppressInsecureTLSWarning`

## Debugging SqlClient on Linux from Windows

For enhanced developer experience, we support debugging SqlClient on Linux from Windows, using the project "**Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.DockerLinuxTest**" that requires "Container Tools" to be enabled in Visual Studio. You may import configuration: [VS19Components.vsconfig](./tools/vsconfig/VS19Components.vsconfig) if not enabled already.

This project is also included in `docker-compose.yml` to demonstrate connectivity with SQL Server docker image.

To run the same:

1. Build the Solution in Visual Studio
2. Set  `docker-compose` as Startup Project
3. Run "Docker-Compose" launch configuration.
4. You will see similar message in Debug window:

    ```log
    Connected to SQL Server v15.00.4023 from Unix 4.19.76.0
    The program 'dotnet' has exited with code 0 (0x0).
    ```

5. Now you can write code in [Program.cs](/src/Microsoft.Data.SqlClient/tests/DockerLinuxTest/Program.cs) to debug SqlClient on Linux!

### Troubleshooting Docker issues

There may be times where connection cannot be made to SQL Server, we found below ideas helpful:

- Clear Docker images to create clean image from time-to-time, and clear docker cache if needed by running `docker system prune` in Command Prompt.

- If you face `Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.SNI.dll not found` errors when debugging, try updating the below properties in the netcore\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.csproj file and try again:

  ```xml
    <OSGroup>Unix</OSGroup>
    <TargetsWindows>false</TargetsWindows>
    <TargetsUnix>true</TargetsUnix>
  ```

## Collecting Code Coverage

### Using VSTest

```bash
dotnet test <test_properties...> --collect:"Code Coverage"
```

### Using Coverlet Collector

```bash
dotnet test <test_properties...> --collect:"XPlat Code Coverage"
```

## Run Performance Tests

### Running Performance test project directly

Project location from Root: `src\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient\tests\PerformanceTests\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.PerformanceTests.csproj`
Configure `runnerconfig.json` file with connection string and preferred settings to run Benchmark Jobs.

```bash
cd src\Microsoft.Data.SqlClient\tests\PerformanceTests
dotnet run -c Release -f net8.0
```

_Only "**Release** Configuration" applies to Performance Tests_
