# Release Notes

## Microsoft.Data.SqlClient 1.0.0 Preview 1 released 6 May 2019

This is the initial public preview release of the new Microsoft.Data.SqlClient namespace. It is a fork and combination of the code from the System.Data.SqlClient namespace in .NET Framework 4.7.2 and .NET Core 2.2.4. It contains all the APIs present in System.Data.SqlClient which were present in those namespaces at the time of the fork, plus those listed below.

### Target Platform Support

* .NET Framework 4.6+ (x64 only)
* .NET Core 2.1+ (Windows x86, Windows x64, Linux, macOS)
* .NET Standard 2.0+ (Windows x86, Windows x64, Linux, macOS)

### Dependencies

#### .NET Framework

* System.Data.Common version="4.3.0"

#### .NET Core

* Microsoft.Win32.Registry 4.5.0
* runtime.native.System.Data.SqlClient.sni 4.4.0
* System.Security.Principal.Windows 4.5.0
* System.Text.Encoding.CodePages" 4.5.0
* System.Configuration.ConfigurationManager 4.5.0

#### .NET Standard

* Microsoft.Win32.Registry 4.5.0
* runtime.native.System.Data.SqlClient.sni 4.4.0
* System.Buffers 4.4.0
* System.Diagnostics.DiagnosticSource 4.5.0
* System.Memory 4.5.1
* System.Security.Principal.Windows 4.5.0
* System.Text.Encoding.CodePages 4.5.0
* System.Configuration.ConfigurationManager 4.5.0

### New Features

New features over .NET Framework 4.7.2 System.Data.SqlClient.

* Data Classification - Available in Azure SQL Database and Microsoft SQL Server 2019 CTP
* UTF-8 support - Available against Microsoft SQL Server SQL Server 2019 CTP

New features over .NET Core 2.2 System.Data.SqlClient.

* Data Classification - Available in Azure SQL Database and Microsoft SQL Server 2019 CTP
* UTF-8 support - Available against Microsoft SQL Server SQL Server 2019 CTP
* Always Encrypted with Enclaves - Always Encrypted is availabe in Microsoft SQL Server 2016 and higher. Enclave support is introduced in Microsoft Sql Server 2019 CTP.

### Fixed

* XEvents are arriving as expected, but with 1 XEvent delay

### Known Issues
 
 * When targeting .NET Framework and platform AnyCPU or x86, you may see a build warning about processor architecture mismatch:

   *Warning	There was a mismatch between the processor architecture of the project being built "MSIL" and the processor architecture of the reference "Microsoft.Data.SqlClient...*

   This is because Microsoft.Data.SqlClient targeting .NET Framework contains a native code component and native components cannot target AnyCPU. Currently x64 is the only platform supported when targeting .NET Framework. To resolve the warning, change your application to target x64. This will be resolved in a future release.
